Three Perspectives on Life

Capra defines the pattern of organisation of a living system as the configuration of relationships among the system’s components that determines the system’s essential characteristics, the structure of the system as the material embodiment of its pattern of organisation, and the life process as the continual process of this embodiment.
When we study living systems from the perspective of form, we find that their pattern of organisation is that of a self-generating network. From the perspective of matter, the material structure of a living system is a dissipative structure, i.e. an open system operating far from equilibrium. From the process perspective, finally, living systems are cognitive systems in which the process of cognition is closely linked to the pattern of autopoiesis or self generation. In a nutshell, this is Capra’s synthesis of the new scientific understanding of life.
The essential characteristic that distinguishes living from nonliving systems – the cellular metabolism – is not a property of matter, nor a special ‘vital force’. It is a specific pattern of relationships among chemical processes that produce material components; the network pattern itself is nonmaterial.
The structural changes in this network pattern are understood as cognitive processes that eventually give rise to conscious experience and conceptual thought. All these cognitive phenomena are nonmaterial, but they are embodied – they arise from and are shaped by the body. Thus, life is never divorced from matter, even though its essential characteristics – organisation, complexity, processes and so on – are non material.

Meaning – the Fourth Perspective

To extend the new understanding of life to the social domain, we have to account for many phenomena – rules of behaviour, values, intentions, goals, strategies, designs, power relations etc– that play no role in most of the nonhuman world but are essential to human social life. However, these diverse characteristics of social reality all share a basic common feature, which provides a natural link to the systems view of life.
This link is self-awareness/reflective consciousness which emerged, together with language, conceptual thought and the social world of organised relationships, culture and technology. The understanding of social reality is inextricably linked to an understanding of reflective consciousness.
More specifically, our ability to hold mental images of material objects and events seems to be a fundamental condition for the emergence of key characteristics of social life. Being able to hold mental images enables us to choose among several alternatives, which is necessary to formulate values and social rules of behaviour.
Conflicts of interest, based on different values, are at the origin of relationships of power. Our intentions, awareness of purposes and designs and strategies to reach identified goals all require the projection of mental images into the future.
Capra postulates that the systemic understanding of life can be extended to the social domain by adding the perspective of meaning to the other three perspectives on life. He uses ‘meaning’ as short-hand for the inner world of reflective consciousness. A full understanding of social phenomena, then, must involve the integration of four interconnected perspectives – form, matter, process and meaning.
Integrating the four perspective means recognising that each contributes significantly to the understanding of social phenomenon. For example, we shall see that culture is created and sustained by a network (form) of communications (process), in which meaning is generated. The culture’s material embodiments (matter) include artefacts and written texts, through which meaning is passed on from generation to generation.

Extending the Systems Approach
Capra seeks to integrate all four perspectives of form, matter, process, and meaning to reach a systematic understanding of social reality.

Assumption

There is a fundamental unity to life and different living systems exhibit similar patterns of organisation. As life evolves these patterns become more and more elaborate, but are variations on a theme. The network is one of the very basic patterns of organisation at all levels of life and we can apply our knowledge of principles of networks to social reality BUT we should not expect to transfer our understanding of the network’s material structure directly from the biological to the social domain.
A cellular network is a non linear pattern of organisation and a social network is a non linear pattern of organisation – concepts such as feedback or emergence are likely to be relevant in the social context, but the nodes and links of the network are not biochemical.
Social networks are networks of communication involving symbolic language, cultural constraints and relationships of power and so on.

Networks of Communications

Question: Are they autopoietic - self-organising/ self-generating?
Luhmann has developed a theory of social autopoiesis. Communications are the elements of social networks. They are produced and reproduced by a network of communications and cannot exist outside that network.
Networks of communication are self generating. Each communication creates thoughts and meaning giving rise to further communication thus producing generative communications. As they recur in multiple feedback loops they produce a shared context of meaning that is sustained by further communications.
Through this shared context of meaning, individuals acquire identities as members of the social network and this shared context of meaning generates a network boundary. This is not a physical boundary but a boundary of expectations, confidentiality and loyalty which is maintained and renegotiated by the network itself.
Human communication has a dual nature and involves:
a) continual coordination of behaviour (because it involves conceptual thinking and language); and
b) generating mental images, thoughts and meanings.

Social networks will have a dual effect. They:
a) generate ideas and contexts of meaning; and
b) generate rules of behaviour (or social structures).

Meaning, Purpose and Human Freedom

The metabolic network of the cell generates material structures (cell walls, carriers of information/energy, catalysts). Social networks generate material structures – buildings,
roads, technologies, etc. – that become structural components of the network. They also produce material goods, artefacts, etc. that are exchanged between the network nodes.
BUT the structures are created for a purpose – to a design – and they embody meaning.
Meaning has to do with context i.e. we interpret something by putting it into a particular context of concepts, values, beliefs or circumstances. To understand meaning we need to relate it to other things in its environment, in its past, or in its future.
Meaning is essential to humans. We need to make sense of our outer and inner worlds, find meaning in our environment and in our relationships and act according to that meaning. This includes our need to act with a purpose in mind. Because of our ability to project images into the future, we act with the conviction – valid or invalid – that our actions are voluntary, intentional and purposeful.
The behaviour of living organisms is constrained but not determined by outside forces i.e. self organising behaviour is not imposed by the environment but is established by the system itself. More specifically, behaviour is determined by its own structure – as structure is formed by a succession of structural changes. The autonomy of living systems must not be confused with independence. Living organisms are not isolated from
their environment. They interact continually, but the environment does not determine their organisation.
At the human level we experience this self determination as freedom to act according to our own choices and decisions. To experience these as our own means they are determined by our nature, including past experiences and genetic heritage. To the extent we are not constrained by human relationships of power, our behaviour is self determined and therefore free.

Structure in Biological and Social Systems
The generation of structures, both material and social, is a key characteristic of the dynamics of social systems.
The central focus of a systemic analysis is the notion of organisation, or ‘pattern of organisation’. Living systems are self-generating networks, which means that their pattern of organisation is a network pattern in which each component contributes to the production of other components. This idea can be extended to the social domain by identifying the relevant living networks as networks of communications.
In the social realm, the concept of organisation takes on an additional meaning. Social organisations, such as businesses or political institutions, are systems whose patterns of organisation are designed specifically to distribute power. These formally designed patterns are known as organisational structures and are visually represented by the standard organisational charts. They are ultimately rules of behaviour that facilitate decision-making and embody relationships of power.
In biological systems, all structures are material structures. Social systems produce nonmaterial as well as material structures. The processes that sustain a social network are processes of communication, which generate shared meaning and rules of behaviour (the network’s culture), as well as a shared body of knowledge. The rules of behaviour whether formal or informal, are called social structures and may be documented. They are also embodied in artefacts, works of art, technology and other material structures.
Indeed, the activities of the individuals in social networks specifically include the organised production of material goods. All these material structures are created for a purpose and according to some design. They are embodiments of the shared meaning generated by the society’s networks of communications.

